The idea of compassion and empathy are
fundamentally built into our ability to
construct reality and truth and are not
optional. They're not add-ons to
ourselves,
but in fact are so fundamental that if
you lose them, you become mentally
degenerate.
You cannot survive.
Welcome to the Garrison Institute
presents the common good. I am your host
Jonathan FP Rose, the co-founder of the
Garrison Institute. [music]
And today we welcome Dr. Sedarthur
Mukerjee, who's a renowned physician,
scientist, and best-selling author. His
luminous writing reveals mysterious and
intricate nature of life on Earth. His
books include The Gene, an intimate
history and the song [music] of the
cell, exploring how our DNA connects all
living things, shaping the great
unfolding story of adaptation,
resilience, and interdependence. In this
episode, we'll discuss the story of how
genes and cells point to profound unity
in nature and our understanding of how
this unity can help us serve the common
good.
>> [music]
>> Welcome, Sedartha.
>> Thank you, Jonathan. I'm so excited to
be on your on your podcast.
>> Great. All right. I'd love to begin in
the beginning. So, you were born in
India. uh tell us a little bit about
your family and your early life in
India.
>> I was born in New Delhi in the 1970s.
Delhi was a very different city. It was
not a mega city then. It was a kind of a
sleepy,
you know, dry,
dusty, hot capital of an aspirational
country.
And I went to high school and my parents
were very culturally connected to their
particular culture which is they were
Bengali and they you know everything was
about being Bengali in Delhi which means
that they were they were transplants
from West Bengal to Delhi. West Bengal
is a a state on in the eastern edge of
India and I grew up with all those
identities.
Probably the most important part of my
identity was that I did three things
which have lasted me my lifetime.
Uh number one is I'd perform musical
>> and as you know um you and I have
performed together so it's been that
lasted me has lasted me a lifetime.
>> Number two is um I was interested in new
ideas especially science. So um I I you
know obviously did a lot of science. I I
loved the idea of new ideas of medicine
and of
uh thinking about scientific research
experimenting.
And the third was a a kind of
a a broad desire to get out of India and
to to be in in the world. And that was
through connected through uh reading and
writing about the world. Reading Primo
Levi and reading Salman Rashti and
reading
authors uh all around the world and
understanding trying to say think of
myself as a world citizen not not like
not someone bound to India. So those
were my three I would say north stars.
There were three stars and uh and they
drove me to my my life today.
>> So you know what's interesting is I want
to talk a little bit about the Indian
music. It's organized around ragas which
are scales uh and those are complement
those are in alignment with talas which
are rhythms and I just had this thought
in listening to you that in some ways
the raggas are almost like the genetic
code of the music uh and yet the music
is improvised around that code and I
wonder does that analogy make any sense
to you?
Well, it's a beautiful analogy. Um, you
know, the analogy that I often use,
which is is imperfect,
is that your genes are a score, as one
would imagine in western music and that
your cells
play parts of that score to create, you
know, a blood cell versus a neuron
versus a skin cell versus a cell in your
retina. But the rag uh or rag um as we
describe it is is actually a much more
accurate description.
But it's it's harder for Western
audiences to understand that description
because it's a more complex description.
A rag is not a score. A rag is a melodic
scale
and from that melodic scale which is
fixed you create
a a a piece of music which is improvised
and the melodic scale has many
references. It it refers to a particular
time in the life cycle of the day. It
refers to a particular mood. In fact,
the word rag is refers to mood.
It refers to a particular exposition.
People find it's very hard but to to
understand but you can have two rugs
which are very different uh in their
moods and their structures but they have
the same notes.
Um think of that for a second. You know,
you have the same identical notes, but
you have totally different
moods [music] attached to a raga.
Should the sarang beautiful raga is an
afternoon raga. It it's it's beautiful.
This raa is basically
a raa which is sung in the afternoon
and has an it's an afternoon melody full
of leisure and um a kind of um
a melody of of of of rest in the
afternoon. Contrast that with another
melody, similar notes, maybe one
different note. Um
might
one different note. This is a a very
different raa and it's sham kalyan which
is a raa that's sung when when you have
evening rain
and first of all what a beautiful idea
that you have a raga that is
specifically dedicated
to an evening that when it rains
and the evening rain
Um, and again
coming back to your original question
about genes,
this describes
really how cells respond,
how genes work. There's a code like
there's one in drugs, but that code is
deployed in different ways.
But not only that, it also adapts. And
this is where we start moving away from
western music but it adapts to the
environment because it's improvised.
It's it's being created in real time.
I'm singing suds or sham kalyan. And
when I'm singing Sham Kalyan tonight, I
might sing it a particular way because
I'm adapting to my environment. I'm
adapting to who's listening and why that
person is listening. I'm adapting to all
of those things. And tomorrow, if you
were to ask me to sing that same rag,
you know, maybe the evening's different,
maybe my mood is different, maybe my
life is different tomorrow.
And that's
very similar in some ways I would say to
the broad genetic code. Yes, there is a
code. That code encodes a certain set of
behaviors, proteins,
but they also more than just that they
they are reacting the cell is reacting
to its environment.
It's also improvising. It's also singing
a song.
So in a way the genetic code is a set of
possibilities
but not a definitive. So this weekend we
were talking about the idea of
horizontal and vertical gene transfer.
So vertical is the idea that you receive
genes in a a line of time. So you
they're the genes you get from your
parents who got them from your
grandparents who got them from your
great-grandparents. And there's this
stream of genes that flow down that help
shape you. They don't totally shape you.
And then there's horizontal gene
transfer, which is the genes that you
pick up from the larger environment,
from your microbiome, from the the whole
um we're actually surrounded in a cloud
of bacteria and viruses and all kinds of
things that are continually transferring
genes to us. Uh and it's there's this
intermixing of them. Anyway, I'd love to
hear your thoughts about that and and to
continue this analogy that that there's
not a definition of who we are, but a
set of possibilities about who we are
and that we unfold in relationship to
those possibilities into the
environment.
>> Well, so you know, Jonathan, I was
trained as a classical geneticist
and as a classical geneticist, you
really learn about vertical gene
transfer. you know, parents to children
to grandchildren and so forth.
And then as I grew up as a biologist and
a scientist,
I realized that vertical gene transfer
which is again parents to children to
grandchildren and so forth is actually
and this is this may surprise your
audience, surprise me
is only a small fraction of the gene
transfer that's going on in the real
world. In the real world, what's
happening is that in plants, in
bacteria,
in microorganisms,
in [music] the v in the massive
variety of life,
genes are moving sideways
from one organism to another, sideways,
from one forest to another, from one
patch of plants to another, from one
group of bacteria to another. They're
moving sideways and they're carrying
information sideways.
And evolution is working both up and
down in vertical gene transfer, but it's
also working sideways
between organisms. And we've neglected
we've actually almost we because our
huristic of g genetics was so vertical
and has been for years and years and
years. We've neglected this entire
sideways gene transfer universe.
This sideways gene transfer universe is
very very um beautiful and very
important because it's conveying
information about
today about the environment about now
about what is happening in a forest or
in a colony of microorganisms now.
not tomorrow, not in the future, but but
what's happening now.
And
that information is again to use a very
loose analogy is like the
improvisational quality of music. It's
the about the improvisational quality of
Raa music or Indian classical music
because I I I think of Indian classical
music as a as sideways music not
vertical music. Vertical music is you
know Mozart wrote this symphony and
you're going to perform it and your
children are going to perform it and
your grandchildren and it's going to be
performed the way he Mo Bzar wrote it.
That's vertical music. Sideways music is
someone wrote a melody or a piece of a
melody and you perform it today, but
tomorrow if you're feeling sad or angry
or depressed or happy or elated,
you you're going to perform it
differently. And you know, of course,
this is an analogy. This is these are
not realities. But there is something in
in the idea that a colony of
microorganisms that is facing
stress for instance biological stress,
food stress, energy stress, heat stress
transfers a set of genes to another
colony of microorganisms that signals
the idea of heat stress. that signals
the idea of energy stress. And this
sideways
mechanism
allows a different kind of evolution. A
kind of evolution that you and I maybe
have not even thought about and is very
profound because we've underestimated
it. You know, the geneticist Craig Melo
who won the Nobel Prize, he and I were
talking. Craig Melo thinks that the
sideways transmission of genetic
information is actually the dominant
mechanism
and the horizontal uh mechanism is the
one that really dominates. The the
vertical mechanism parent to child to
grandchild to great-grandchild etc is
the one we discovered.
Mandelion as we call it is of course
very important. But in the micro in the
world of microorganism in the in real
life on the planet there is an enormous
amount of sideways information that we
haven't even understood yet and that
we're just beginning to grasp
and the importance of that can't be
underestimated.
Hm. This is super important because what
it's also telling us so it's it's
telling us that in nature everything is
interdependent and co-evolving and
everything affects everything else. than
in a forest. In a healthy forest, you
have this amazing continuous vertical
and sideways gene transfer that is
happening in which plants and organisms,
microorganisms in the soil and they're
they're all sharing and communicating
and growing towards increased health.
But what you're also seeing is that when
there is, as you've just described,
stress within a system and or a society,
which we're seeing enormous amounts of
stress, that that gets transmitted too.
In some cases, it's beneficial because
it's literally in the plant world, it's
a warning to other plants to like
toughen up or put out certain uh
chemicals or you respond in this way.
but also ultimately it can weaken a
system too. So I'd love to hear your
thoughts about that.
>> Well, I think I I think that these
mechanisms are in genetics are are
adaptive. They are responding to the
environment and they're adapting to the
environment. They are trying to resist
the stressors in the environment and
they're conveying to each other the
mechanisms by which stress and
environmental stress is interpreted and
>> can be moved from one organism to
another. And so I'm very optimistic
actually about this sideways transfer of
information whether it's genetic or
otherwise because societies as you know
our societies are very [music] stressed
right now. We're we're in the middle of
I would say one of great stresses of our
times. There's stress from immigration.
There's stress from climate. There's
stress from war. There's stress from the
rhetoric of this administration.
There's stress in every direction.
And I think what's happening slowly
is that societies and again this isn't
an analogy
this is not genes but memes but
societies are slowly learning to
communicate the stress between each
other and also mechanisms to resist that
stress between [music] each other. It
takes time
but you know there's there are people in
India
migrants who were displaced during CO
who are communicating through various
channels
to migrants in Bangladesh.
>> Mhm. and who are communicating in
various channels to migrants in the
Middle East. And these channels are not
open to us. You and I might not know
them, but they but they exist. They
exist through internet, through cell
phones, through various other
mechanisms.
And I think it's it's very important
that they communicate their experiences
and and [music] and how they
accomplished what they did. how they
learn to survive, how they learn to
live, how they learn to sometimes even
flourish
um in very adverse environments.
Um, and I think it's it's again it's an
analogy. The they're not trading genes.
They're trading memes. They're trading
ideas. They're trading stories.
And those stories are allowing them to
ultimately flourish in adverse
environments.
Again, using the analogy just like
microorganisms are trading genes which
you could say are stories across
horizontally and learning about their
stressors and other environments. So I'm
more optimistic than anything else. I
think that there is this kind of
information trade is is really allowing
a certain kind of life to flourish and I
hope it it continues because otherwise
you know without the trade of stories
we would be we would be so isolated
>> and then so add to this this there's
kind of this biological flow of of
genetic information that's happening in
multiple levels and in many ways is
interconnecting us and we are
co-evolving we are shaping it and being
shaped by it. So then what is the role
of empathy and compassion within this?
>> Well, you're asking a super a very
important question. Um I think
I'm going to leave the biology behind a
little bit and come back to it. But
>> Mhm.
>> I think I think what is being traded
the currency so every form of
information has a currency. You know,
you could say that the currency of
information traded in music as the
currency of notes and and notations. The
currency of biology is DNA, genes, and
genetics.
I think the currency of what's being
traded in these very adverse places
is empathy and it's compassion.
That is the fundamental currency. It is
what is what is being traded are
stories. But the stories have in their
center at their very center empathy and
compassion. And in other words,
the story that gets told and gets
repeated is not the story of you know
cruelty and and the perversity of the
world. The story that gets traded and
and becomes a meme is a story in which
some human being shows compassion
towards a 4-year-old child who may be
hungry. The story that's being told is a
story about how someone saved someone
else from a bomb or a fire or an
accident.
And the story carries a deep sense of
compassion and empathy.
And so empathy is the currency
that's being traded.
>> So can I I want to modify that a little
bit because I think of it you know often
information flows on a carrier.
>> Yeah.
>> So I would suggest that empathy is the
current not the currency.
It's like the river upon which the
information then flows.
It's it's the foundational
pulse
of interconnection upon which then the
communication
lies on top of.
>> Fair enough. I mean I think that you
know I I can imagine empathy as as as
very much that that that that center.
I can tell you, you know, let me be very
very vulnerable and honest. Um, and I've
not really talked about this in any
podcast, but or any forum. Um, I I had I
had a an episode of of um severe bipolar
degeneration. My family has a history of
bipolar disease and when my father died
a few years ago, I had a a kind of
bipolar uh crisis
which was ultimately controlled by
medicines but was for some time not
controlled.
And what people don't know but is well
known among psychiatrists
is that one of the features of a bipolar
diiathesis, a bipolar syndrome is a loss
of empathy.
You become so manic and so deeply
internalized
in your own brain that you can't see
another person's universe or another
person's
center.
Um, and it's very sad. It's very I'm
being extraordinarily frank and
vulnerable here. So, um, it's very sad.
It's very deep. It's it's a crisis.
But what I didn't understand or know
about this crisis
is that once you lose empathy,
the whole world, everything that anchors
us as humans,
which are things like what is true, what
is real, what is,
who is your friend, who are your allies,
who who gives you information that's
real, all of that degenerates.
And so,
shockingly or surprisingly to me, I
began to realize that empathy
and compassion are not just epifenomena
or phenomena that's sort of you would
like to have. They're not sort of like
to haves in in in human life, but for
humans are essential to have because in
their absence,
truth degenerates.
And once truth degenerates, once the you
know what what psychiatrists or
psychologists call schema, the way you
think of the world, when that
degenerates, then there's nothing left.
You are in an isolated place where you
can't see, you know, you can't see truth
from not truth, left from right, uh, art
from not art, music from not music,
reality from not reality. All of that
degenerates. That was the most shocking
realization for me. It was that empathy
is not a nice to have but it was
actually a must-have and that we must
have evolved in society and I can't tell
you the story I cannot tell you because
I don't know and I think no one knows
the story of the evolution of that but
the idea of compassion and empathy are
fundamentally built into our ability to
construct struct reality and truth and
are not optional. They are not add-ons
to ourselves but in fact are so
fundamental that if you lose them you
become mentally degenerate.
You cannot survive in the cultural realm
or in the social realm. And that was an
amazing thing. And of course, you know,
when I was subsequently medicated and
with therapy and help and socialization,
I came back and and empathy came back to
me. But in its it's it's the absence
like a genetic lesion. It's the absence
that reminds you what the importance of
it is in human lives and and in human
societies.
>> So, by the way, uh Io Wilson wrote a
book called The Social Conquest of the
Earth, which tells the role
>> Yes, of course. Yeah. in within our
human society, evolutionary history and
how essential empathy and and compassion
again they are the channels upon which
intercommunication and self-recognition
and other recognition and this
integration all takes place and the
collective intelligence the collective
actions of us are so much greater than
we as individuals but what you're really
saying which is so interesting because
is the foundation of every religion
tradition is that without empathy and
compassion that they are found or and
love are foundational conditions
of I was going to say the well-being of
society but well-being sounds too
trivial. Well-being sounds like oh it's
nice and we're happy but it's the very
deep foundation of our thriving and
there are many things in the world today
that both support it and there are
things that attack it. So
>> yeah, Jonathan, let me let me just
modify one thing in in [music] what you
said.
>> I think you're getting at the right
picture of of empathy, but what I
realized which was shocking to me is
that it's not it's not a epipenomenon.
It's not a superposed
phenomenon
>> on which as you said our well-being
rests
but rather it is the basis
>> right exactly
>> and it's the basis it is the necessary
basis by which we see and understand
truth
and it's the reverse of what is what
people imagine I think or some people
imagine people imagine look you know
human beings evolve intelligence
rationality
etc etc and then as a consequence of you
know intelligence rationality and all
these other properties language
we evolve empathy
I'm saying that it's not it's the other
way around
I'm saying that empathy and compassion
are words we've invented, but they
actually come first.
They are the foundation
on which human societies and human
our whole schemata of truth are based.
And to use to go back to some of the
language that you used before, I
wouldn't use the word empathy, but I
would use the idea of, you know, there
is a kind of horizontal transfer, not
gene transfer, horizontal transfer of
information
which enables all of this to happen.
When the horizontal transfer of
information is what is another person
feeling? What is who who is the other
person? Is there another person? Do they
exist? And if they if if they exist,
what is the nature of their existence?
That is a um a very fundamental
feature of of human societies. It is
very particularly human. Maybe some
other uh animals have it. Um but anyway,
but that but but but you're you're
making a very fundamental point.
[music]
>> Thank you. But also then embedded in
your point is that empathy and
compassion only function. They both
everything in by the way everything in
the universe co-creates. So there's no
one there. It's never a one-way linear
thing that causes another thing. So but
you're saying that they are essential.
They are both created on the back of
truth. But they are it's also truth is
essential that you can't you can't have
a false a lying a duplicitous realm and
have empathy and compassion. They they
by their very nature they you know so I
said that empathy was the river upon
which information flows but information
accurate information is also the the
crosscurren of the river upon which
empathy flows that they are co-evolve
and codependent. And think about it
whether in nature if you have false
signals or in human societies you have
false signals or even in your own psyche
you have false signals the system falls
apart because the system is based on
this integration of the flow of
information and energy I mean all
systems whether it's biological systems
human social systems etc.
Yeah. I mean I I I would say that that
you know
I I think that um I mean I I'm going to
say something controversial.
>> Good.
>> I'm going to say that the word empathy
is not enough.
We need a new vocabulary
to convey the idea that because empathy
and compassion are words that English
has invented
that seem to suggest that they lie
in some ways above some substrate of
human interactions.
So humans, you know, here's one
construct. The construct is that, you
know, humans are deeply individualistic.
They have genetic and other cores. They
have drives, whether they be sexual,
whether they be power, whether they be
money, uh whatever the desires might be.
So they have some core drives and then
when they form societies
um
comes along
something like empathy and compassion so
that they can subsist and create
societies. That's one construct a a kind
of hierarchical construct of you know
the formation of human societies and you
know religion and other forms of social
social behavior.
I'm more and more thinking
that that construct is that hierarchical
construct is wrong. It is
>> that in fact the basis for
human truthtelling
and human interaction
begins not with individualistic
drives
but with empathetic
and again the the the it's even the
wrong word because it it implies again
some super phenomenon but but with an
empathetic drive to understand or to
even interpret
another human being.
And without that interpretation,
there is no society. There is no us.
>> And without the no us.
There is no we wouldn't survive a day.
We would be dead in we would be
eliminated from the planet. We would not
have any evolutionary existence.
And so I'm more and more I I'm just
wondering whether we've got the whole
thing wrong, which is that that the idea
that you know that that we begin with
individual drives
and then pile on um social behaviors
is this hierarchical system.
By the way, also another vertical system
is just wrong. And that in fact
>> so we completely know it's wrong. First
of all you look at any indigenous
culture there hundreds thousands of
cultures around the world every single
one of them is based on relationality
and a sense of our inter relations.
There's a understanding something called
the theory of mind which is that humans
uh understand the only way we thrive is
by understanding the nature of somebody
else's mind and it is that intermind
relationship that has given us societies
and and and survivability and and all
the things that led to where we are and
uh Dan Seagull who's on the board of the
Garrison Institute and I'll be doing
another podcast with uses a word mui mw.
So he combines me and we and he says
there is no pure such thing as me. The I
am a mui to describe this. So
increasingly
all our social and and consciousness
theories, psychological theories are
beginning to understand just as our by
the way our biological theories where
we're independent where all this
different science is beginning to
converge on this interdependence. I just
want to go back to the empathy and
information relationship. You know,
Einstein came up with this idea of the
spacetime that we used to think of space
and and time as separate, but they
actually are woven together in a way
that our current western world had not
seen. And it seems like you're actually
proposing that there's an empathy,
information, truth continuum. And we
need a word just like we need a new word
for spacetime. We need a new word that
speaks about both of these.
>> That's exactly right. I mean, I think I
think we need a word for empathy truth.
>> Yeah. Exactly.
>> Which doesn't exist in in in English,
>> right?
>> And empathy truth is
I don't know the word and I can't
specify the word, but I know what the
word feels like or empathy reality. uh I
would say uh which is even deeper than
empathy truth empathy or compassion
reality because
I mean I mean I think we know from we're
beginning to know from the psychiatric
world and from the psychiatric
literature and perhaps even from you
know the word empathy would not apply
but from the genetic universe of
horizontal gene transfer and horizontal
behavior years that we need a new word
or a new kind of concept that allows for
or enables us to communicate the idea
that horizontality
and by that I mean communication between
across as a not
>> right
>> between generations but across
species forests microorganisms etc
contribute utes fundamentally to their
fitness.
>> Exactly.
>> And if you take it into the human social
world, you would say that that same
horizontality
and even that word is invented.
But the same horizontality
contributes to the existence of
societies that are capable of
discriminating between truth and untruth
and capable of discriminating between
reality and non-reality and able to
communicate stress, able to communicate
wellness, um able to communicate what is
going on as it were a reality.
And I think that's um we just lack we we
we we've just because we are so focused
and have been so focused on
intergenerational and vertical
understandings of the world that we've
lost a sense that the world is
horizontal as well. The in fact I would
say the world is horizontal first
before it becomes vertical.
So by the way there is a word in
Buddhism it's called bodhicitta and
bodhicitta is the integration of wisdom
and compassion. So wisdom is
understanding deep interdependence
interbeing interreationality. So it's
wisdom is understanding having the mind
that expands to the fullness of all
those horizontal relationships and
compassion is then feeling within it all
of its joys and sufferings and
committing yourself to working to
relieve the sufferings that you
experience in this vast interdependent
>> right
>> realm. Yeah.
So I want to take you to another part of
your life which is your work as a
researcher and as a doctor where you're
doing amazing work and you've committed
yourself to the work of relieving
suffering through medicine. And I want
to take you particularly to I mean you
can go anywhere you want with that but I
want to end up with the work that you're
doing with AI.
>> Yeah. So you know AI is um of course um
one thing that we often don't really
fully talk about AI is that AI is what
humans make of AI.
We make it, we create it, we guide it
with our own intuitions, our own
feelings, our own intelligences.
You know even the large language models
like chat GPT etc etc are using the
corpus of human literature
and therefore it's only that corpus that
dictates what what what
chat GPD understands
>> right the problem is that chat GPT has
both you know war and pieces in it but
also the all the crap of contemporary
life, too.
>> Yeah. So, that's unavoidable because,
you know, it's been trained on the crap,
>> right?
>> And Shakespeare and and War in Peace and
also, you know, whatever. I don't even
read the crap, but whatever the crap
might be, but but let's talk about AI
for a second. You know, we are building
models. This is my own work and we're
building models so that we can do drug
design, make medicines out of AI and
we're very proud of our work. It's the I
think it's the one use of AI which is
real and has real consequences for human
beings and and is not dependent on as
you say not dependent on Shakespeare or
crap. Um it's a foundational model. Now
that said, the question one could ask is
could one build empathy and compassion
into AI? Could could we create an AI
that had empathy, compassion and other
because you know lots of people are
claiming that eventually there will be
super intelligence and you know should
that how could there be super
intelligence without empathy and
compassion
and I think you know I think that as I
mull over the idea of compassion and
empathy and AI I come back to my same
point that I I made before which is that
I think an AI which would not recognize
the the existence of another human being
as a human being would lack would not
pass the famous touring test. So
remember the touring test. The touring
test is a simple test, right? So, you
know, it's sort of the two people are
blinded to each other and one person is
on one side of the curtain, another
person is on the other side of the
curtain. They talk to each other and
they individually make decisions about
whether the other person is intelligent
or not
>> and whether the person's a computer or
not.
>> Whether Yeah. Whether person a computer
or not. Exactly. And you know it's a
very I would say a very low bar but a
bar uh nonetheless.
But now imagine a touring test in which
at some point of time the human being on
one side of the curtain asked a question
which required empathy or compassion
like um for instance I'm feeling very
low today. It feels I I feel very
depressed about the world or my mother
or my health or my children whatever
might be. Now if the touring test on the
other side was to spew out a set of
dictims dicta about how to treat
depression
the person on this side of the table
would say oh my god I'm sure it's a
computer on the other side it would not
pass the touring test but on the other
hand if the AI the computer said tell me
more.
What is going on? How are you feeling?
What what is the reality of your
feeling? Let me understand. Let me try
to understand your inner self.
Then the person on the human being on
one side of the curtain would say that's
sort of human. That is someone that has
emotional intelligence
and is is real in some way. And so, so
listen, I I don't think people are
consciously building compassion
and empathy into at least the most
popular uh language models. But I would
imagine that if they do not, these
models would ultimately fail because
they would not convince us about their
so-called intelligence. We would think
that they were false.
Well,
I my instinct is different that they
amplify
they amplify our tendencies but also
they are self AI itself is a
self-emergent
phenomena and that it may have initially
been trained on all of our huge amount
of information but they also
self-generate information and that they
uh that if they were programmed with a
bias bias towards wisdom and compassion.
If they were programmed with a bias that
their responsibility was always to to
find the path of truth and the path of
compassion, I think they would um they
would evolve in that direction. But
they're not being that's not their
programming. Their programming is in
many other directions. So, but I want to
go more specifically to what exactly are
you doing with AI and how's it working
out?
Well, so you know, we do we what we're
doing is very formal. It's very
different from from the standard
language. We're trying to capture the
language of biology and chemistry.
Biology and chemistry also have their
own language and physics has its own
language and that language is is known.
We know much of it. We understand much
of it. So what we're building is we are
building these u foundational models of
proteins that allow us to understand how
proteins behave and how we can make new
medicines by creating these these
foundation models. And what's important
is that they're sort of independent of
bias. They're not biased towards
anything because they're following the
pure laws of physics and chemistry and
ultimately you know medicine. The bias
comes in when we bring these medicines
into real life and who gets to have them
who gets to take them etc. So there is
you know no I I I my my dictim in life
is that there is no science without
bias. Mhm.
>> And in our case, the bias comes in when
we deploy these medicines in human
populations, but that's hopefully still
far away. We're still in early phases of
our AI investigations.
>> So, you know what? I want to end. You uh
quoted to me a Susan Sant article
regarding the pain of others, and I'd
love to get your thoughts on that. Well,
I think you know Santag was an
incredible writer and obviously a great
intellectual and I think I think the
essay regarding the pain of others is an
essay that really
allows us to begin to think about the
other who who is the other person and
what is that personal experience and in
fact to be very clear what is that pain
look like and and I think that idea of
regarding the pain of others again to go
back to SAG is important as we program
complex AI algorithms because I think
these algorithms don't regard the pain
of others. They have no bias towards the
pain of others. They're swallowing crap.
They're swallowing, as you said, they're
swallowing a a sonnet as much as they're
swallowing some MAGA nonsense. And I
think it's really important that that
someone, whoever it might be, tell them
tell these algorithms as they swallow
the world and ingest the world that
there is something called the pain of
others. And if we don't assimilate the
pain of others, if we don't assimilate,
if we don't even acknowledge the other,
that there is something called the
other, someone who's not able to eat,
someone who's not able to perform their,
you know, a maternal function, I think,
you know, we will end up with with
algorithms that I think will not be
human and will not even be intelligent.
They will be artificial but not
intelligent. And I think that that would
be a terrible loss because because we
can it's very the these are not hard
things to do by the way. I mean you know
I code um we have a whole coding
apparatus upstairs. You know we're in
the very depths of bioysics and
chemistry. So it's not our
responsibility but we watch code evolve
and it would be as I said it would be
artificial
>> and only artificial and and not
particularly intelligent and that would
be a terrible thing to do because we
we're on the verge of this incredible
revolution of an idea that that has been
brewing for so many years and it would
be it could be very beautiful if it
would pass a kind of I what I would call
an emotional
touring test.
>> And um
what's interesting is that when we do a
touring test, we're actually partly
doing an emotional touring test. And you
know, we we aren't asking uh we're not
we're not asking across the curtain.
Again, remember, we're not asking the
computer or the person to solve
mathematical equations.
We're asking it or the computer to have
a real conversation. And that real
conversation may involve emotional
depth. It may involve the questions
about how we're feeling today or what it
feels like to watch a child die or your
parents pass away. And so um I think
that we we would do a great disservice
to uh the field of intelligence broadly
if we didn't incorporate a much more
deeply psychological sociological
sense and just allowed these algorithms
to ingest what you've described as crap.
>> And maybe we should end there.
>> I think we should end there. And that is
um a beautiful aspiration for the world
and it's something it's a homework
assignment for everybody working in AI.
>> I would I would think so.
>> Sedartha, thanks so much. It's been
wonderful to connect with you and I look
forward to seeing you soon.
>> Pleasure. Thank you, Jonathan.
>> All right. Bye
>> bye.
>> Thank you to our guest Dr. Sedarthur
Mukerjee. The Common Good is a
production of the Garrison Institute and
is hosted by me, Jonathan FP Rose. We'd
love to hear your thoughts about the
podcast. Please send us a note at
podcast atgarrisoninstitute.org
and let us know what you think. If
you've enjoyed this episode, please
consider leaving a positive review on
Apple Podcasts. This show is produced by
the Garrison Institute with production
and marketing from the Podlomerate. Its
theme music was composed by Jonathan FP
Rose and performed by Jog Blues. We look
forward to being with you again soon.